The hierarchical method can be
divided into two approaches.
The first approach,
called the agglomerative or
bottom up approach,
is simpler and more popular.
It starts a process with each
object in its own cluster and
with each step it will merge
the two most similar clusters.
This is done through
a concept known as linkage.
There are different methods
available for using linkage and
determining the most similar clusters.
The primary linkage methods are single,
complete, average, and centroid linkage.
Single linkage basically measures
the distance between the closest pair of
points.
Complete linkage measures the distance
between the farthest pair of points.
Average linkage measures the average
distance between all of the points.
And lastly, centroid linkage
measures the distance between
the cluster centroids, or center points.
This last one is the easiest
to implement and explain, so
it is most popular in
fields like biology.
Now the hierarchical process stops
when all of the objects
are aggregated into a single cluster.
The second hierarchical approach is
the divisive or top down approach.
It starts the process with all of
the objects in a single cluster, and
then removes the outsiders from
the least cohesive cluster.
This process stops when each
object is in its own cluster.
With both of these approaches,
one thing to notice
is that you don't have to predetermine
how many clusters there should be.
The process basically builds out
the structure of the hierarchy and
then you can decide how many clusters
work for a good clustering solution.